CHANGES for cgihtml
$Id: CHANGES,v 1.8 1997/02/03 06:42:26 eekim Exp $
===================

1.65 -> 1.66
------------
o Finally replaced all \r\n with \n.  To heck with standards.

o Slightly modified Makefile to handle UPLOADDIR modifications
properly.

1.6 -> 1.65
-----------
o Rewrote parse_CGI_encoded.  Plugged some memory leaks, improved
performance and robustness, and simply made it look better.  Now
returns -1 if the string is not properly encoded.  Should be mostly
transparent to most users.

o Fixed Windows portability bug in parse_file_encoded.

o Fixed parse_file_encoded support for Netscape's Windows browsers.

o Changed functions in html-lib.c to use \n rather than \r\n if
compiled under Windows.

o Added HTTP_USER_AGENT macro to cgi-lib.h

o Added lower_case() to string-lib.h.

o Moved examples to a subdirectory.

o Modified Makefiles.

1.51 -> 1.6
-----------
o Fixed newstr() to properly handle failed malloc.

o Removed die() function and signal() calls in example programs.  Was
causing confusion amongst non-UNIX users.

o Fixed print_cgi_env().

o Added is_field_exists() and is_field_empty().

o Fixed bug in mail.cgi.c so that it allocates correctly for
destination string.

o File upload now puts filename in linked list.

o Fixed buffer problems in file upload.  Now allocates buffers
correctly, and handles non-file information correctly as well.

o Fixed minor bug in file upload that would lose the first line of
information.

o Added set_cookie() in html-lib.c.

o Modified parse_cgi_encoded() to ignore all input if there is no
equals sign in the string.

o Fixed bug in parse_cgi_encoded(); would not return proper value if
input string had one field with no value.

o Added parse_cookies() to cgi-lib.c.

1.5 -> 1.51
-----------
o Got rid of h() and img() from html-lib.h because var_arg was causing
trouble.  Specifically, I couldn't figure out a good, consistent way
of determining when the end of the argument list was reached without
the user specifying it.

o Fixed stupid type in Makefile: gnore.cgi -> ignore.cgi.

o Internal change: Changed all the (*var).structvar (a relic from my
Pascal programming days) to var->structvar.

1.21 -> 1.5
-----------
o Added an interactive debugging mode for interactive form entry from
the command line.

o read_cgi_input() now supports file upload!

o Renames llist.h -> cgi-llist.h.  This is to prevent conflicts with
other linked list packages you may be using.

o Added cgi_name() and cgi_name_multi(), counterparts to cgi_val() and
cgi_val_multi().

o Added var_arg functionality to some HTML functions in html-lib.h.
See documentation for examples.

o h1() .. h6() replaced by more general h().  See documentation for
usage.

o Added the following new functions:

     html-lib.h   cgi-lib.h          string-lib.h
     ----------   ---------          ------------
     img()        cgi_name()         substr()
     hidden()     cgi_name_multi()
                  is_form_empty()

See documentation for more details.

o Modularized read_cgi_input() and improved robustness.

o Moved replace_ltg() from cgi-lib.c to string-lib.c.  Made it
available via string-lib.h.

o <malloc.h> should have been <stdlib.h>.  Thanks to Dan Fetzer
<fetzerdt@ornl.gov> for pointing this out.

o Got rid of extra \r in print_entries().

o Fixed minor bug in Makefile (nph-ignore becomes ignore).

1.2 -> 1.21
-----------

o Fixed bug that prevented die() from being compiled.  Thanks to
Rosemary Paquola <paquola@vega.unive.it> for the bug fix.

1.1 -> 1.2
----------
o Rewrote parsing functions for read_cgi_input().  No longer uses
messy NCSA code (except for unescape_url()).  Improved robustness.

o Defined macros for the standard CGI environment variables.

o Added cgi_val_multi to deal with multiple values with the same
name.  Contributed by Mitch Garnaat <garnaat@wrc.xerox.com> and
modified by yours truly.

o Strengthened escape_input().  Now escapes all non-alphanumeric
characters.

o Modified print_entries() to replace greater than (>) and less than
(<) characters with the appropriate escaped HTML (&gt; and &lt;
respectively).

o Modified some functions for portability to NT.  Thanks to Eliot Muir
<e.m.muir@iprolink.co.nz> for patches.

o Added test.cgi example application.

o Replaced nph-ignore.cgi.c with ignore.cgi.c.  Uses a status header
rather than no-parse-header.

o Added status(), pragma(), print_env_cgi() functions.

o Removed no_parse_header() function.

o Changed int die() to void die().  Thanks to Graham Potts
<graham@pncl.co.uk> for the report.

o Removed carriage returns (\r) from HTML functions.  Unnecessary;
carriage returns are only required in the HTTP headers.

o Fixed stupid bug in h2() .. h6().  Thanks to Andrea Cozzolino
<andcoz@mikonos.diaedu.unisa.it> for reporting this.

o Updated documentation.

1.0 -> 1.1
----------

o Renamed functions to use a more standard naming scheme.  This will
break old programs; make sure you search and replace to rename the
appropriate functions.

     Old function name     New function name
     -----------------     -----------------
     ReadParse             read_cgi_input
     val                   cgi_val
     PrintHeader           html_header
     MethodGet             method_get
     PrintEntries          print_entries

o read_cgi_input now returns a 1 if input is received, and a 0 otherwise.
ReadParse in version 1.0 did just the opposite.

o Used dynamically allocated strings rather than arrays of characters.
There is now no theoretical limit to the size of item.name or item.value.

o Added string-lib library:
   - newstr()

o New cgi-lib functions:

   - accept_images() -- determines whether the client browser will
        accept images.
   - escape_input()  -- filter out shell metacharacters for security
        purposes

o New html-lib functions:

   - mime_header()
   - no_parse_header()
   - show_html_page()
   - h1() ... h6()

o Added two new example programs: index-sample.cgi and nph-ignore.cgi

o Removed example: mailform.cgi

o Included debug-cgi.sh, a shell script which runs CGI programs from
the command line to help debug code.

