
                          INSTALLING GNU MP
                          =================


These instructions are only for the impatient.  Others should read the install
instructions in the manual, gmp.info.  Use "info -f gmp.info", or, if you
don't have info, type "C-u C-h i gmp.info" in emacs.

Here are some brief instructions on how to install MP, and some examples to
help you get started using MP.

First, you need to compile, and optionally install, MP.  Since you're
impatient, try this:

	./configure; make

If that fails, or you care about the performance of MP, you need to read the
full instructions in the chapter "Installing MP", in the manual.

Next, you need to try some small test programs, for example the ones below.

In MP programs, all variables need to be initialized before they are assigned,
and cleared out before program flow leaves the scope in which they were
declared.  Here is an example of a program that reads two numbers from the
command line, multiplies them, and prints the result to stdout.


    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <gmp.h>         /* All MP programs need to include gmp.h */

    main (int argc, char **argv)
    {
      mpz_t a, b, p;

      /* Initialize variables */
      mpz_init (a);
      mpz_init (b);
      mpz_init (p);

      /* Assign a and b from base 10 strings in argv */
      mpz_set_str (a, argv[1], 10);
      mpz_set_str (b, argv[2], 10);

      /* Multiply a and b and put the result in p */
      mpz_mul (p, a, b);

      /* Print p in base 10 */
      mpz_out_str (stdout, 10, p);
      fputc ('\n', stdout);

      /* Clear out variables */
      mpz_clear (a);
      mpz_clear (b);
      mpz_clear (p);
      exit (0);
    }


This might look tedious, with all the initializing and clearing.  Fortunately
some of these operations can be combined, and other operations can often be
avoided.  The example above would be written differently by an experienced GNU
MP user:


    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <gmp.h>

    main (int argc, char **argv)
    {
      mpz_t a, b, p;

      /* Initialize and assign a and b from base 10 strings in argv */
      mpz_init_set_str (a, argv[1], 10);
      mpz_init_set_str (b, argv[2], 10);
      /* Initialize p */
      mpz_init (p);

      /* Multiply a and b and put the result in p */
      mpz_mul (p, a, b);

      /* Print p in base 10 */
      mpz_out_str (stdout, 10, p);
      fputc ('\n', stdout);

      /* Since we're about to exit, no need to clear out variables */
      exit (0);
    }

Now you have to compile your test program, and link it with the MP library.
Assuming your working directory is still the gmp source directory, and your
source file is called example.c, enter:

	gcc -g -I. example.c .libs/libgmp.a -lm

The -lm is normally not needed, since only a few functions in MP use the math
library.  After installing, the command becomes: gcc -g example.c -lgmp -lm
MP is libtool based, and you can use that to link if you want.

Now try to run the example:

	./a.out 98365871231256752134 319378318340103345227
	31415926535897932384618573336104570964418

The functions used here all operate on signed integers, and have names
starting with "mpz_".  There are many more such functions than used in these
examples.  See the chapter "Integer Functions" in the manual, for a complete
list.

There are two other main classes of functions in MP.  They operate on rational
numbers and floating-point numbers, respectively.  The chapters "Rational
Number Functions", and "Floating-point Functions" document these classes.

To run a set of tests, do "make check".  This will take a while.

To create the printable documentation from the texinfo source, type "make
gmp.dvi" or "make gmp.ps".  This requires various "tex" commands.

To install the library, do "make install" (you can then use -lgmp instead of
.libs/libgmp.a).

If you decide to use MP, It is a good idea you read at least the chapter "MP
Basics" in the manual.

Some known build problems are noted in the "Installing MP" chapter of
the manual.  Please report other problems to bug-gmp@gnu.org.



----------------
Local variables:
mode: text
fill-column: 78
End:
