                                                                   -*- text -*-
			Installation Procedure

0) Preparation

To build and install GNU Wget, you need to unpack the archive (which
you have presumably done, since you are reading this), and read on.
Like most GNU utilities, Wget uses the GNU Autoconf mechanism for
build and installation; those of you familiar with compiling GNU
software will feel at home.

1) Configuration

To configure Wget, run the configure script provided with the
distribution.  You may use all the standard arguments configure
scripts take.  The most important ones are:

  --help                  print help message

  --prefix=PREFIX         install architecture-independent files in PREFIX
                          (/usr/local by default)
  --bindir=DIR            user executables in DIR (PREFIX/bin)
  --infodir=DIR           info documentation in DIR [PREFIX/info]
  --mandir=DIR            man documentation in DIR [PREFIX/man]

  --build=BUILD           configure for building on BUILD [BUILD=HOST]
  --host=HOST             configure for HOST [guessed]
  --target=TARGET         configure for TARGET [TARGET=HOST]

--enable and --with options recognized (mostly Wget-specific):
  --with-socks            use the socks library
  --disable-opie          disable support for opie or s/key FTP login
  --disable-digest        disable support for HTTP digest authorization
  --disable-debug         disable support for debugging output
  --disable-nls           do not use Native Language Support

So, if you want to configure Wget for installation in your home
directory, you can type:
./configure --prefix=$HOME

You can customize many default settings by editing Makefile and
config.h.  The program will work very well without your touching these
files, but it is useful to have a look at things you can change there.

If you use socks, it is useful to add -L/usr/local/lib (or wherever
the socks library is installed) to LDFLAGS in Makefile.

To configure Wget on Windows, run configure.bat and follow the
instructions in the windows/ directory.  If this doesn't work for any
reason, talk to the Windows developers listed in `windows/README'; I
do not maintain the port.

2) Compilation

To compile the program, type make and cross your fingers.  If you do
not have an ANSI compiler, Wget will try to KNR-ize its sources "on
the fly".  This should make GNU Wget compilable virtually anywhere.

After the compilation a ready to use `wget' executable should reside
in the src directory.  I do not have any kind of test-suite as of this
moment, but it should be easy enough to test whether the basic stuff
works.

3) Installation

Use `make install' to install GNU Wget to directories specified to
configure (/usr/local/* by default).

The standard installation process will copy the wget binary to
/usr/local/bin, install the info pages (wget.info*) to
/usr/local/info.  You can customize the directories either through the
configuration process or making the necessary changes in the Makefile.

To delete the files created by Wget installation, you can use make
uninstall.
