===================================
SocketCAN - Controller Area Network
===================================

Overview / What is SocketCAN
============================

The socketcan package is an implementation of CAN protocols
(Controller Area Network) for Linux.  CAN is a networking technology
which has widespread use in automation, embedded devices, and
automotive fields.  While there have been other CAN implementations
for Linux based on character devices, SocketCAN uses the Berkeley
socket API, the Linux network stack and implements the CAN device
drivers as network interfaces.  The CAN socket API has been designed
as similar as possible to the TCP/IP protocols to allow programmers,
familiar with network programming, to easily learn how to use CAN
sockets.


.. _socketcan-motivation:

Motivation / Why Using the Socket API
=====================================

There have been CAN implementations for Linux before SocketCAN so the
question arises, why we have started another project.  Most existing
implementations come as a device driver for some CAN hardware, they
are based on character devices and provide comparatively little
functionality.  Usually, there is only a hardware-specific device
driver which provides a character device interface to send and
receive raw CAN frames, directly to/from the controller hardware.
Queueing of frames and higher-level transport protocols like ISO-TP
have to be implemented in user space applications.  Also, most
character-device implementations support only one single process to
open the device at a time, similar to a serial interface.  Exchanging
the CAN controller requires employment of another device driver and
often the need for adaption of large parts of the application to the
new driver's API.

SocketCAN was designed to overcome all of these limitations.  A new
protocol family has been implemented which provides a socket interface
to user space applications and which builds upon the Linux network
layer, enabling use all of the provided queueing functionality.  A device
driver for CA